# Compiler/Interpreter

## Compiler

1. **Execution Model**
    - A **compiler** translates **source code** (high-level programming language) into **machine code** (binary code) **before** execution (statically).
    - The result is an **executable file** that can run directly on the computer.
2. **Execution** - The CPU executes the compiled machine code directly.
3. **Advantages**
    - Faster execution.
    - Private code.
    - Useful in Gaming systems & OS.
4. **Disadvantages**
    - No cross-platform support.
    - Slower development.
5. **Example language** - C
6. **Steps**
    - Write the source code (e.g., `add.c`).
    - Compile the code (e.g., `gcc add.c -o add`).
    - Execute the machine code directly (e.g., `./add`).

---

## Interpreter

1. **Execution Model**
    - An **interpreter** translates **source code** (high-level programming language) into **machine code** (binary code) and executes during runtime (dynamically).
2. **Execution**
    - **CPU** executes the machine code generated by the interpreter line-by-line.
3. **Advantages**
    - Supports cross-platform.
    - Faster development.
    - Easy to debug.
4. **Disadvantages**
    - Slower in execution.
    - There is no privacy for code.
5. **Example** **Language** - JavaScript.
6. **Steps**
    - Write source code (e.g., `script.js`).
    - Run with the interpreter (e.g., `node script.js` or in a browser).
    - The interpreter converts and executes the code line-by-line.

---

## Hybrid

1. **Execution Model**
    - Combines both **compilation** and **interpretation**.
    - **Compilation** - The source code is first **compiled into an intermediate representation** (bytecode).
    - **Interpretation -** executed by an interpreter or a virtual machine (like JVM or PVM).
2. **Execution**
    - **CPU** executes the machine code generated by the interpreter line-by-line.
3. **Advantages**
    - Supports cross-platform.
    - Faster execution than the interpreter model.
4. **Example Language - Java** and **Python.**
5. **Steps**
    - Write the source code in Java.
    - Compile into an intermediate code using **javac**.
    - The Java virtual machine loads the bytecode and executes it.
    - The JVM may compile some of the bytecode into **machine code** during runtime for optimization, using **JIT compilation**.